>> Stewart: ON THIS EDITION FOR
SUNDAY, SEPTEMBER 6:
THOUSANDS OF MIGRANTS AND
REFUGEES ARE WELCOMED IN AUSTRIA
AND GERMANY, AS THE FOUR-AND-A-
HALF-YEAR CIVIL WAR IN SYRIA
CONTINUES.
AND, DOES REQUIRING EXTRA
READING TIME AFTER SCHOOL
IMPROVE STUDENTS' READING
PROFICIENCY?
NEXT ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
>>PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND IS MADE
POSSIBLE BY:
LEWIS B. AND LOUISE HIRSCHFELD
CULLMAN.
BERNARD AND IRENE SCHWARTZ.
THE CHERYL AND PHILIP MILSTEIN
FAMILY.
JUDY AND JOSH WESTON.
SUE AND EDGAR WACHENHEIM, III.
CORPORATE FUNDING IS PROVIDED
BY MUTUAL OF AMERICA--
DESIGNING CUSTOMIZED INDIVIDUAL
AND GROUP RETIREMENT PRODUCTS.
THAT'S WHY WE ARE YOUR
RETIREMENT COMPANY.
ADDITIONAL SUPPORT HAS BEEN
PROVIDED BY:
AND BY THE CORPORATION FOR
PUBLIC BROADCASTING, AND BY
CONTRIBUTIONS TO YOUR PBS
STATION FROM VIEWERS LIKE YOU.
THANK YOU.
FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS AT
LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
ALISON STEWART.
>> Stewart: GOOD EVENING, THANKS
FOR JOINING US.
I'M ALISON STEWART, IN FOR HARI
SREENIVASAN.
POPE FRANCIS IS CALLING ON EVERY
CATHOLIC PARISH IN EUROPE TO
SHELTER AT LEAST ONE FAMILY OF
MIGRANTS OR REFUGEES POURING
INTO THE CONTINENT.
TODAY, DURING MASS AT SAINT
PETER'S SQUARE, THE POPE
ANNOUNCED THE VATICAN ITSELF
WILL HOUSE TWO FAMILIES WHO, HE
SAID, ARE "FLEEING DEATH BY WAR
AND BY HUNGER."
>> (translated): THE GOSPEL
CALLS US TO BE NEIGHBORS TO THE
SMALLEST AND MOST ABANDONED TO
GIVE THEM CONCRETE HOPE.
>> Stewart: FRANCIS ALSO
CRITICIZED HUNGARY'S PLAN TO
COMPLETE A 108-MILE FENCE ALONG
ITS SOUTHERN BORDER WITH SERBIA,
WHERE MANY ARE CROSSING FROM
MACEDONIA, WHICH NEIGHBORS
GREECE, THE BUSIEST ENTRY POINT
INTO EUROPE, BY BOAT.
IN GREECE TODAY, THE GOVERNMENT
FERRIED 1,700 MORE PEOPLE HELD
AT THE ISLAND OF LESBOS TO
ATHENS.
GREECE HAS TRANSPORTED 13,000
MIGRANTS AND REFUGEES TO THE
MAINLAND THIS WEEK.
SO FAR THIS YEAR, AN ESTIMATED
300,000 PEOPLE FLEEING WAR-TORN
SYRIA, LIBYA, IRAQ, AND
AFGHANISTAN HAVE ARRIVED IN
EUROPE, INCLUDING 100,000 IN THE
PAST MONTH.
THIS WEEKEND, AT LEAST 12,000
REFUGEES HAVE CROSSED BY TRAIN
AND BUS FROM HUNGARY INTO
VIENNA, AUSTRIA.
BUT HUNDREDS WHO HAVE REGISTERED
FOR ASYLUM IN HUNGARY HAVE BEEN
PLACED IN REFUGEE CAMPS.
GERMANY IS THE DESIRED FINAL
DESTINATION FOR MANY ASYLUM
SEEKERS, AND AS ITN'S SANGEETA
KANDOLA REPORTS, SO FAR THE
COUNTRY IS OFFERING A WARM
WELCOME.
>> THEY WERE GREETED BY CHEERS,
BANNERS AND SWEETS ACROSS
GERMANY.
THE ESTIMATED 6,000 REFUGEES WHO
HAD MADE THE EXHAUSTING JOURNEY
BY FOOT, BUS AND TRAIN TO GET
HERE.
IN A COUNTRY WHICH SAYS IT CAN'T
COPE WITH THE INFLUX.
>> THEY WERE ON THE RECEIVING
END OF SCENES LIKE THIS, RELIEF.
>> GREAT, I FEEL GREAT.
>> FINALLY.
>> AFTER DAYS OF CONFRONTATION
WITH POLICE, HUNGARY OPENED ITS
BORDERS WITH AUSTRIA AND BUSSED
AND TRAINED THOUSANDS OF PEOPLE
WHO HAD BEGUN WALKING TO THE
FRONTIER.
THOSE ARRIVING IN MUNICH AND
VIENNA, MOSTLY SYRIANS FLEEING
THE WAR THERE HAVE BEEN SENT TO
RECEPTION CENTERS TO BE
REGISTERED, TO SEEK FOOD AND
CLOTHING.
>> GERMAN CHANCELLOR MERKEL IS
TO HOLD TALKS WITH HER COALITION
PARTNERS ON A CRISIS THAT HAS
DIVIDED THE EU, THE EUROPEAN
COMMISSION SHE HAS BEEN PUSH FOG
ARCO AT THAT SYSTEM FOR DIVIDING
THE PEOPLE REACHING EUROPE
BETWEEN MEMBER STATES.
BUT THIS IS GOING TO -- .. IN
THE MEANTIME, THOUSANDS MORE ARE
CONTINUING TO MAKE THE JOURNEY,
RISKING LIFE AND LIMB IN SEARCH
OF A BETTER LIFE.
>>
>> Stewart: THE BIGGEST CATALYST
FOR THE MASS MIGRATION TO EUROPE
IS SYRIA'S CIVIL WAR, WHICH IS
BELIEVED TO HAVE KILLED 250,000
PEOPLE AND DRIVEN AN ESTIMATED
11 MILLION SYRIANS FROM THEIR
HOMES.
SECRETARY OF STATE JOHN KERRY
WARNED RUSSIA'S FOREIGN MINISTER
THIS WEEKEND ABOUT REPORTS OF
RUSSIA INCREASING SPECIFIC TYPES
OF SUPPORT FOR SYRIAN PRESIDENT
BASHAR AL-ASSAD'S REGIME.
KERRY SAYS THE INCREASED SUPPORT
COULD ESCALATE THE CONFLICT AND
THE REFUGEE CRISIS.
JOINING ME NOW FROM WASHINGTON
TO DISCUSS THE WAR IN SYRIA IS
ANTHONY CORDESMAN, WHO IS THE
ARLEIGH A. BURKE CHAIR IN
STRATEGY AT THE CENTER FOR
STRATEGIC AND INTERNATIONAL
STUDIES.
>> Stewart: SO SECRETARY OF
STATE KERRY'S CONCERNS, AT THIS
POINT IN THE CONFLICT, WHAT
WOULD A RUSSIAN INFUSION OF
SUPPORT FOR ASSAD'S ARMY AND
REGIME MEAN?
>> PEOPLE ARE CONCERNED THERE IS
EVIDENCE THAT HE MAY BE
PROVIDING OR PUTIN MAY BE
PROVIDING SOMETHING LIKE A
THOUSAND PEOPLE'S WORTH OF
PREFABRICATED HOUSING.
THAT IS, HAS LED SOME ANALYSTS
TO BELIEVE THAT IN RUSSIA MAY BE
DEPLOYING AIR UNITS AND MODERN
AIRCRAFT OR A NEW KIND OF
ADVISORY TEAM.
ANY BUILDUP WILL HELP ASSAD RIDE
OUT OR SURVIVE AT LEAST FOR A
WHILE THE OPPOSITION.
ANY KIND OF ACTIVE AIR PRESENCE
REPRESENTS SYRIA'S PROBLEMS FOR
THE UNITED STATES, FOR TURKEY,
FOR THE OTHER COALITION
COUNTRIES FLYING AIR SORTIES
BECAUSE OF THE RISK THAT THERE
MIGHT BE SOME KIND OF INCIDENT
BETWEEN THE RUSSIANS AND THE AIR
FORCE'S OPERATING AGAINST THE
ISLAMIC STATE.
NO MATTER WHAT HAPPENS, THAT
KIND OF OPERATION WOULD PRESENT
PROBLEMS FOR THE UNITED STATES
BECAUSE OUR ARAB ALLIES,
PARTICULARLY SAUDI ARABIA,
KUWAIT AND THE UNITED ARAB
EMIRATES ARE SUPPORTING SOME OF
THE FORCES ON THE GROUND THAT
ARE OPPOSING ASSAD DIRECTLY.
>> Stewart: THIS CONFLICT
BEGAN IN 2011, IT IS 2015.
AT THIS POINT, WHAT STANDS OUT
TO YOU AS A MAJOR ISSUES KEEPING
US FROM A DIPLOMATIC SOLUTION
HERE?
>> I THINK THERE ARE SEVERAL
REASONS, BUT THE MOST IMPORTANT
ONE IS NO ONE HAS EMERGED AS A
CREDIBLE ALTERNATIVE.
SYRIA IS NOW DIVIDED REALLY INTO
FOUR PARTS.
THERE IS A KURDISH AREA, THE
KURDS HAVE NO GREAT INCENTIVE TO
BE A PART OF SYRIA.
THEY WERE TREATED AS
SECOND-CLASS CITIZENS BEFORE
THIS BEGAN, AND MANY DIDN'T EVEN
HAVE IDENTIFICATION PAPERS.
YOU HAVE THE ISLAMIC STATE,
WHICH OCCUPIES A SIGNIFICANT
PART OF EASTERN SYRIA,
PARTICULARLY ALONG THE RIVER
AREA.
IT HAS A, IT IS NOT A DENSELY
POPULATED AREA BUT ONE THE
ISLAMIC STATE CAN ACTUALLY
CONTROL.
AND THEN YOU VA MIX OF SOME 26
TO 35 DIFFERENT OPPOSITION
GROUPS WHO ARE DOING MOST OF THE
FIGHTING AGAINST ASSAD.
THEY ARE MORE IN THE CENTRAL
HEAVILY POPULATED AREAS OF
SYRIA, BUT THEY HAVE ALMOST
NOTHING IN COMMON WITH THE ASSAD
REGIME, WITH THE ISLAMIC STATE
OR WITH THE KURDS .. THERE ARE
TROOPS OUTSIDE OF SYRIA THAT
CLAIM TO REPRESENT THE
OPPOSITION, THE FACT IS THAT
MANY OF THEM WERE TIED TO MORE
MODERATE, SECULAR MILITARY
MOVEMENTS WHICH HAVE EFFECTIVELY
BEEN DEFEATED AND VIRTUALLY
DISAPPEARED.
>> Stewart: THERE HAS BEEN
QUITE A BIT OF CRITICISM ABOUT
NEIGHBORING COUNTRIES NOT
STEPPING IN TO HELP EASE THE
HUMANITARIAN CRISIS, SAUDI
ARABIA, QATAR, THE UNITED ARAB
EMIRATES.
WHAT IS YOUR ANALYSIS OF WHY
THESE COUNTRIES HAVE NOT STEPPED
IN AND STEPPED UP?
>> ALL OF THEM, FRANKLY, ARE
DEEPLY CONCERNED @WHAT THESE
REFUGEES MIGHT BE AND WHO THEY
MIGHT HAVE ALIGNMENTS WITH.
ALL OF THEM ARE DEALING WITH
THEIR OWN PROBLEMS, IRAN, YEMEN,
ISLAMIC STATE GROUPS, AL QAEDA
IN THE ARABIAN PENS LA, ALL OF
THEM TO BE, TEND TO BE CLOSED
SOCIETIES WHICH SECURITY PUTS
TIGHT LIMITS ON ANY FORM OF
IMMIGRATION.
>> Stewart: ANTHONY CORDESMAN,
THANK YOU SO MUCH FOR HELPING US
UNDERSTAND IT A BIT MORE.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Stewart: AS KIDS ACROSS THE
COUNTRY HEAD BACK TO SCHOOL, WE
ARE GOING TO EXAMINE A FIRST-OF-
ITS-KIND PROGRAM MEANT TO BOOST
READING SKILLS.
FLORIDA REQUIRES ITS LOWEST-
PERFORMING SCHOOLS TO LENGTHEN
THEIR SCHOOL DAY FOR ONE HOUR TO
FOCUS ON READING.
THE MANDATE APPLIES TO THE
STATE'S 300 LOWEST-PERFORMING
SCHOOLS, AS RANKED BY THEIR
STANDARDIZED TEST SCORES.
AS YOU'D EXPECT, A LIVELY DEBATE
IS UNDERWAY ABOUT THE WISDOM AND
EFFECTIVENESS OF THE PLAN.
TONIGHT'S UPDATED SIGNATURE
SEGMENT, WHICH WE ORIGINALLY
BROADCAST LAST YEAR, REVISITS
THIS APPROACH.
JAYLON JENKINS JUST STARTED
THIRD GRADE.
AND EVERY DAY AFTER SCHOOL, HE
DOES HOMEWORK WITH THE AUNT THAT
IS RAISING HIM, ANTONIA
WILLIAMS.
>> REMEMBER, WE TALKED ABOUT THE
TENSES, FROM RIDE TO...
>> R, O, D, E.
>> I'M NOT A TYRANT.
WHEN HE FIRST COMES HOME I
NORMALLY HAVE... LET HIM HAVE A
20-MINUTE BREAK.
HE GETS A SNACK.
YOU WANT APPLE?
AND THEN WE START HIS HOMEWORK.
I'LL GIVE HIM A BREAK IN BETWEEN
BECAUSE IT'S A LOT TO RETAIN AND
TO COMPREHEND, SO THIS IS OUR...
THIS IS OUR DAILY SCHEDULE.
>> Stewart: A SCHEDULE THAT
ALREADY INCLUDES AN EXTRA HOUR
OF READING EVERY DAY, FOR JAYLON
AND FOR EVERY OTHER STUDENT AT
HIS SCHOOL: PHILLIS WHEATLEY
ELEMENTARY IN APOPKA, FLORIDA,
JUST NORTHWEST OF ORLANDO IN
ORANGE COUNTY.
ANTONIA, WHAT DID YOU THINK WHEN
YOU FIRST HEARD THAT JAYLON'S
SCHOOL WAS GOING TO REQUIRE ONE
EXTRA HOUR OF READING?
>> I WAS LIKE, "YES."
>> Stewart: YEAH?
>> I WAS, LIKE, "YES."
I MEAN, WHAT ELSE WOULD A CHILD
BE DOING THAT HOUR AFTER SCHOOL,
YOU KNOW?
YES, IT WOULD BE A LONGER DAY
AND I WAS CONCERNED ABOUT HIM
BEING FOCUSED AND STAYING ON
TASK FOR SUCH A LONG TIME.
BUT HE'S IN A STRUCTURED
ENVIRONMENT.
YOU KNOW, IT'S NOT LIKE THEY'RE
ON THE PLAYGROUND FOR AN EXTRA
HOUR.
THEY'RE READING.
>> Stewart: HAS HE ASKED YOU WHY
HE STAYS AN EXTRA HOUR?
>> I DON'T EVEN THINK HE
REALIZES IT.
>> Stewart: THE EXTRA HOUR OF
READING AT WHEATLEY ELEMENTARY
IS NOT VOLUNTARY.
A 2012 LAW REQUIRED THE 100
LOWEST-PERFORMING ELEMENTARY
SCHOOLS IN FLORIDA TO ADD AN
HOUR OF READING INSTRUCTION.
THE RANKINGS WERE DETERMINED BY
THE STATE'S STANDARDIZED READING
TEST RESULTS.
THE EXPANSION IS ESTIMATED TO
COST MORE THAN $4 MILLION
ANNUALLY FOR WHEATLEY AND 19
OTHER PUBLIC SCHOOLS IN ORANGE
COUNTY, FLORIDA, THE TENTH
LARGEST SCHOOL DISTRICT IN THE
COUNTRY.
>> WHAT DO YOU THINK IT IS?
>> Stewart: WHEN WE VISITED
PHILLIS WHEATLEY LAST YEAR, SEAN
BROWN WAS THE SCHOOL'S
PRINCIPAL.
>> ONCE WE HIT THAT LAST HOUR OF
THE DAY, IT'S STRICTLY READING.
>> Stewart: FROM FOURTH GRADERS
WORKING ON READING COMPREHENSION
QUESTIONS...
>> WE COULD ELIMINATE
UNDERGROUND...
>> Stewart: ...TO FIRST GRADERS
JUST LEARNING THE BASICS...
>> THEY GET DARKER AND DARKER...
>> Stewart: STUDENTS, TAUGHT BY
TEACHERS FROM THE SCHOOL...
>> HARE...
>> Stewart: READ, READ AND READ
SOME MORE.
>> WE WANT TO HONE IN ON THE
READING SKILLS AND THEN JUST
PUSH THE STUDENTS ACADEMICALLY
AS MUCH AS POSSIBLE.
>> Stewart: A HIGH-POVERTY
SCHOOL WHERE ALL STUDENTS GET
FREE BREAKFAST AND LUNCH,
PHILLIS WHEATLEY ELEMENTARY IS
IN A NEIGHBORHOOD WITH A HIGH
CRIME RATE AND IS THE TYPE OF
SCHOOL ADMINISTRATORS THINK
COULD PARTICULARLY BENEFIT FROM
THE EXTRA READING TIME.
DO YOU THINK YOUR STUDENTS NEED
THIS EXTRA HOUR?
>> YES, I DO.
>> Stewart: WHY IS THAT?
IS IT... IS IT BECAUSE THEY'RE
SO FAR BEHIND?
IS IT JUST NOT ENOUGH TIME
DURING THE DAY TO TEACH THESE
KIDS?
>> THERE'S SEVERAL REASONS.
I KNOW THAT WITH POVERTY AND
ADDING THINGS OF THAT NATURE, I
KNOW THAT A LOT OF OUR STUDENTS,
THEY'RE SO MUCH FURTHER BEHIND A
STUDENT THAT HAS TWO PARENTS OR
A STUDENT THAT HAS A HIGH
WORKING-CLASS FAMILY.
SO THIS IS THE MECHANISM THAT
WILL HELP CLOSE THAT GAP BETWEEN
THE STUDENTS THAT ARE LIVING IN
POVERTY AND STUDENTS THAT ARE
NOT LIVING IN POVERTY.
>> Stewart: AFTER INSTITUTING
THE HOUR OF EXTRA READING EVERY
DAY IN 2012, WHEATLEY SAW THE
NUMBER OF CHILDREN READING A
GRADE LEVEL GO FROM 26 PERCENT
TO 41 PERCENT.
SUCH A BIG IMPROVEMENT THAT
WHEATLEY WAS FREED FROM THE
READING MANDATE THE FOLLOWING
YEAR.
UP TO 38 PERCENT THE FOLLOWING
STATEWIDE, IN THE FIRST YEAR,
76 PERCENT OF SCHOOLS WITH EXTRA
READING TIME SAW AN IMPROVEMENT
IN KIDS READING AT GRADE LEVEL.
69 PERCENT OF THE LOW PERFORMING
SCHOOLS ALSO SAW IT INCREASE IN
THE SECOND YEAR.
>> THE
>> THE RESULTS HAVE TURNED OUT
TO BE DRAMATIC.
>> Stewart: REPUBLICAN STATE
SENATOR DAVID SIMMONS IS THE
FORCE BEHIND THE STATE LAW
ADDING THE EXTRA HOUR.
THE SON OF TWO PUBLIC SCHOOL
TEACHERS, HE SAYS HE FIRST HEARD
ABOUT ADDING EXTRA TIME FROM A
PRINCIPAL AT A STRUGGLING
ORLANDO SCHOOL.
>> AND IN TALKING TO HIM, HE
SAID, "IF I JUST HAD MORE TIME
WITH THESE CHILDREN, I COULD
MAKE A BIG, BIG DIFFERENCE WITH
THEM."
AND HE SAID, "IT'S NOT THAT THEY
CAN'T LEARN.
IT'S THEY DON'T HAVE ENOUGH TIME
TO LEARN."
>> Stewart: LAST YEAR SENATOR
SIMMONS PUSHED TO EXPAND THE
NUMBER OF ELEMENTARY SCHOOLS
REQUIRED TO HAVE EXTRA READING
TIME FROM THE 100 LOWEST-
PERFORMING TO THE 300 LOWEST-
PERFORMING, INCLUDING PHILLIS
WHEATLEY.
BY EXPANDING THE LIST, SIMMONS
BELIEVES SCHOOLS THAT IMPROVE
THEIR TEST SCORES ONE YEAR WON'T
LOSE THE EXTRA READING TIME THE
NEXT.
THIS YEAR THE SAME 300 SCHOOLS
WILL PROVIDE THAT EXTRA HOUR OF
READING TIME.
WHEN YOU FIRST PRESENTED THE
IDEA OF THIS ADDITIONAL HOUR OF
READING TO YOUR COLLEAGUES, WHAT
KIND OF QUESTIONS DID THEY HAVE
FOR YOU?
>> IS IT GONNA WORK?
>> Stewart: MAKE THE CASE FOR
ME.
>> OKAY.
CERTAINLY.
OTHER NATIONS, INDUSTRIALIZED
NATIONS, SEND THEIR CHILDREN TO
SCHOOL, ALL OF THEIR CHILDREN,
SIGNIFICANTLY LONGER THAN WE DO
HERE ON AVERAGE IN THE UNITED
STATES.
WE'RE TALKING ABOUT TRYING TO
CRAM A HUGE AMOUNT OF
INFORMATION INTO THE MINDS OF
THESE CHILDREN IN A LIMITED
AMOUNT OF TIME.
IT'S LIKE TRYING TO PUT 25
POUNDS OF SUGAR IN A 10 POUND
SACK.
>> SENATOR SIMMONS IS LOOKING AT
A PIECE OF FOOL'S GOLD, AND HE
BELIEVES IT'S REAL GENUINE GOLD.
>> Stewart: RICK ROACH SERVED ON
THE ORANGE COUNTY SCHOOL BOARD
FOR 16 YEARS.
THE RETIRED TEACHER AND GUIDANCE
COUNSELOR IS NOT CONVINCED
MANDATED EXTRA READING TIME IS
THE SOLUTION THAT IT SEEMS.
>> I DON'T THINK IT HAS TRUE
EDUCATIONAL VALUE.
AND I THINK IT COULD BE MORE
HELPFUL IF YOU JUST TAKE YOUR
EYES OFF OF A TEST SCORE.
IT DOESN'T NECESSARILY MEAN THAT
THAT CHILD COMES OUT OF THERE A
BETTER READER OR HAS DEVELOPED A
LOVE OF READING.
IT SIMPLY MEANS THEY'VE JAMMED
UP A RAW SCORE ON A SINGLE
MEASURE TEST.
>> Stewart: AND THERE'S THE
QUESTION: WHO GETS TO DECIDE THE
BEST WAY TO HELP KIDS LEARN?
WHAT WAS THE DEBATE LIKE OR THE
DISCUSSION LIKE WHEN IT FIRST
CAME UP-- "SHOULD WE HAVE KIDS
READ FOR AN EXTRA HOUR AFTER
SCHOOL?"
>> PLEASE... I HAVE TO LAUGH AT
THAT ONE.
THERE WAS NO DEBATE ON THAT.
THERE WAS SIMPLY... THE COMMAND
CAME DOWN FROM THE HILL, "THOU
SHALT PUT AN EXTRA HOUR INTO THE
SCHOOL."
THERE WAS NO DEBATE, THE BOARD
DIDN'T DISCUSS THAT.
LOCAL... THERE WAS NO LOCAL
FEEDBACK INTO THAT.
NOT TO MENTION THE FACT THAT
MANY PEOPLE WHO MAKE THESE LAWS
NEVER TAUGHT ONE DAY IN A
CLASSROOM.
>> Stewart: THERE ARE OTHER
CONCERNS AS WELL: DISTRICT
OFFICIALS FIND OUT WHICH SCHOOLS
ARE REQUIRED TO ADD THE EXTRA
READING HOUR JUST WEEKS BEFORE
SCHOOL STARTS.
BUS SCHEDULES HAVE TO CHANGE AND
TEACHING STAFF SECURED.
SOME PARENTS VOICED CONCERN OVER
THE EXHAUSTION LEVEL OF KIDS
WHOSE DAYS ARE PUSHED AN HOUR
LATER, AND THE REDUCTION OF
FAMILY TIME.
AND WHILE KIDS WHO SCORED THE
HIGHEST LEVEL ON THE READING
SECTION OF THE STATE'S
STANDARDIZED TEST CAN OPT OUT,
FOR THE MOST PART, EVERYONE IS
REQUIRED TO STAY THE EXTRA HOUR.
ROACH SAYS THE DATA THAT
SUPPORTERS CITE ONLY TELLS PART
OF THE STORY, AND THAT SIMILAR
STUDENTS WITHOUT THE EXTRA HOUR
OF READING HAVE SHOWN
IMPROVEMENT IN PROFICIENCY IN
THE PAST FEW YEARS.
IF SOMETHING LIKE THIS HAPPENS
AND IT HELPS ANYBODY, ISN'T IT
WORTH CONTINUING AND TRYING?
>> YOU KNOW, I THINK FEW PEOPLE
WOULD DISAGREE WITH THE FACT
THAT WE'RE GOING TO GIVE KIDS
WHO MAY BE LOW READERS EXTRA
TIME TO READ.
BUT THERE'S A CONSEQUENCE TO
THAT.
YOU MAY IN FACT DRIVE UP A
READING SCORE, BUT YOU ALSO LOSE
OTHER-OTHER FEATURES AS WELL.
IF THEY'D GAVE US SOME
OPTIONS... YOU COULD'VE EXTENDED
THE YEAR BY 20 DAYS AND KEPT THE
SAME NUMBER OF HOURS IF YOU LET
LOCAL CONTROL COME INTO PLAY FOR
THE SAME MONEY.
>> Stewart: THE CRITICISM I'VE
HEARD FROM A COUPLE OF DIFFERENT
FOLKS WHO ARE INVOLVED IN
EDUCATION THAT THEY WORK ON THE
LOCAL LEVEL, THEY'RE IN THE
SCHOOLS, AND THE IDEA THAT THEY
HAVE TO TAKE THIS MONEY, COME UP
WITH IT AND PUT IT JUST ON
READING, EVERYBODY SUPPORTS
READING BUT PERHAPS THAT'S NOT
WHAT THEIR SCHOOL NEEDS.
>> IF THE VAST MAJORITY OF YOUR
STUDENTS HAVE ON OUR TESTS, YOU
KNOW, STANDARDIZED TESTS, SHOWN
THAT THEY CANNOT READ AT GRADE
LEVEL, THEN THEY NEED READING
INSTRUCTION.
THAT'S A SIMPLE FACT OF LIFE.
>> THUMBS UP IF YOU REMEMBER AND
YOU UNDERSTAND.
>> Stewart: AND THERE'S STILL
THE ISSUE OF FUNDING-- WHO PAYS
FOR IT NOW AND IN THE FUTURE.
WHAT WOULD IT TAKE FOR THIS
PROGRAM TO BE GUARANTEED
FUNDING?
RIGHT NOW IT'S YEAR TO YEAR TO
YEAR IF THE DISTRICT CAN COME UP
WITH THE MONEY.
>> I CAN TELL YOU THAT IT IS MY
COMMITMENT, NOW THAT WE ARE
SEEING THE PERFORMANCE, THAT WE
WILL IN FACT DEDICATE THE
FUNDING FOR THIS IN ORDER TO GET
THIS ACCOMPLISHED.
>> Stewart: BUT THIS YEAR STATE
LEGISLATORS DID NOT EARMARK NEW
MONEY FOR EXTRA SCHOOL READING
TIME.
SENATOR SIMMONS HAD ALSO
PROPOSED EXPANDING THE MANDATE
TO INCLUDE SUMMER READING
INSTRUCTION AND NOTIFYING
SCHOOLS NO LATER THAN JULY IF
THEY MUST ADD THE EXTRA HOUR OF
READING IN THE FALL.
BUT THE AMENDMENT WAS NOT
SUCCESSFUL.
AMIDST THE DEBATE, PHILLIS
WHEATLEY ELEMENTARY IS COMMITTED
TO KEEPING THE EXTRA HOUR, AND
HAS SOUGHT A FEDERAL GRANT TO
MAKE SURE WHEATLEY CAN PAY FOR
THE LONGER SCHOOL DAY WHETHER IT
IS MANDATED TO OR NOT.
AND IT ISN'T LOST ON ANYONE THAT
THE SCHOOL IS NAMED AFTER
PHILLIS WHEATLEY, A FORMER SLAVE
WHO BECAME A WRITER, THE FIRST
AFRICAN-AMERICAN WOMAN POET TO
BE PUBLISHED.
>> Stewart: WATCH OUR REPORT
ABOUT A WEST VIRGINIA SCHOOL
DISTRICT THAT HAS STUDENTS IN
CLASS YEAR-ROUND.
VISIT pbs.org/newshour.
>> Stewart: FROM MEASURING THE
READING SKILLS OF ELEMENTARY
SCHOOL STUDENTS, WE TURN TO
TESTING HIGH SCHOOL STUDENTS
EYEING COLLEGE.
THIS YEAR'S SCORES FOR THE
S.A.T., THE STANDARDIZED TEST
TAKEN BY A MAJORITY OF
PROSPECTIVE COLLEGE FRESHMEN,
WERE RELEASED THIS WEEK, AND
THEY ARE THE LOWEST SINCE THE
TEST WAS REVAMPED A DECADE AGO.
THIS YEAR, THE AVERAGE TOTAL
SCORE WAS 1490 OUT OF A POSSIBLE
2400, DOWN FROM 1497 LAST YEAR
AND 1498 THE YEAR BEFORE.
THE AVERAGE MATH SCORE WAS 511
OUT OF A POSSIBLE 800, THE
LOWEST SINCE 1999.
THE AVERAGE READING SCORE WAS
495, THE LOWEST SINCE 1972.
WHAT DO THESE NUMBERS MEAN?
JOINING ME NOW TO DISCUSS THAT
IS "BLOOMBERG NEWS" REPORTER
JANET LORIN.
>> ANYTHING SIGNIFICANT CHANGE
ABOUT THE TEST IN THE PAST YEAR
OR TWO THAT WOULD POINT TO THIS
DECLINE?
>> WE KNOW MORE PEOPLE ARE
TAKING THE TEST.
THIS YEAR WE HAD RECORD NUMBER
OF TEST TAKERS AND PART OF THE
REASON WAS BECAUSE THE COLLEGE
BOARD WAS ABLE TO GET MORE
STATES TO PAY TO TAKE -- FOR
EVERY STUDENT TO TAKE THE TEST.
>> Stewart: OKAY.
>> SO WE HAVE MORE PEOPLE TAKING
IT, THE SOCIOECONOMIC DIVERSITY
IS GOING TO BE DIFFERENT AND
THAT COULD BE CERTAINLY ONE
REASON FOR IT.
NEXT YEAR WE ARE GOING TO SEE
PRETTY SIGNIFICANT CHANGES WITH
THE SATS STARTING IN MARCH, IT
IS GOING TO BE A COMPLETELY NEW
TEST.
IT IS ACTUALLY GOING TO LOOK A
LOT MORE HIKE THE ACT, IT IS,
ITS COMPETITOR, YOU WON'T BE
PENALIZED FOR WRONG ANSWERS.
THOSE ESOTERIC WORDS THAT
EVERYBODY STUDIED FOR WILL BE
GONE AND TESTING MORE,
SUPPOSEDLY, WHAT YOU KNOW IN
SCHOOL, AND THERE WILL BE AN
OPTIONAL WRITING TEST.
>> Stewart: LET'S TALK ABOUT
THAT POPULATION A LITTLE BIT.
SO THE POPULATION EXPANDED AND
YOU HAD MORE STUDENTS WHO WERE
PERHAPS UNDERSERVED?
>> YES.
>> Stewart: TAKING THE TEST.
A. YES.
WHEN THE STATE IS PAYING FOR
EVERY STUDENT TO TAKE THE TEST,
YOU HAVE A RANGE OF STUDENTS
TAKING IT, RATHER THAN, YOU
KNOW, TYPICALLY MORE WEALTHY
STUDENTS WHO ARE TAKING IT AND
ALSO HAVE GOTTEN A LOT OF TEST
PREP.
ONE THING WE HEAR A LOT OF IS
THAT HIGH TEST SCORES CORRELATE
WITH INCOME, SO IT SHOULDN'T BE
SURPRISING THAT WEALTHIER KIDS
DO BETTER ON THIS TEST.
IN FACT, IN THE LAST COUPLE OF
YEARS WE RECEIVED QUITE A NUMBER
OF VERY SELECTIVE COLLEGES SAY
WE ARE NOT GOING TO USE THIS AS
A HERB FOR ADMISSIONS.
SCHOOLS WITH SUCH BRAND NAMES
LIKE WESLEY AND CONNECTICUT AND
BRANDEIS.
>> Stewart: SO HOW IS THE SAT
GOING TO STAY RELEVANT IF YOU
HAVE COMPETITIVE COLLEGES
SAYING, YOU KNOW WHAT?
IT IS OPTIONAL?
>> THAT'S A GOOD QUESTION.
FOR SOME SCHOOLS THAT ATTRACT,
YOU KNOW, 30,000 APPLICATIONS,
THEY STILL WANT SOME, SOME
MEASURE IN ADDITION TO YOUR
GRADE POINT AVERAGE AND OTHER
THINGS.
YOU KNOW, IT IS A WAY TO
BENCHMARK STUDENTS AND WHEN
THEY ARE GETTING THOUSANDS, IT
IS JUST PRACTICAL TO KEEP THAT
REQUIREMENT IN THERE.
>> Stewart: SO THIS WRITING
PORTION OF THE TEST HAS BEEN IN
FOR ABOUT THE PAST DECADE, DID
IT HAVE ANY INFLUENCE ON THE
LOWER END OF THE TEST SCORES?
>> WELL, THE WRITING TEST YOU
CAN SEE FROM THE CHARTS HAS GONE
DOWN, AND -- SOME PEOPLE HAD
CRITICIZED IT BECAUSE THE
RESULTS COULD BE GAMED.
IT IS WRITING, YOU KNOW, NOT
NECESSARILY ABOUT ANYTHING THAT
WOULD BE FACT BASED, BUT IT
WOULD BE SORT OF LIKE AN ESSAY
AND A CRITICISM WAS YOU COULD
ACTUALLY MEMORIZE A COUPLE OF
POINTS TO INCLUDE AND IT DIDN'T
ACTUALLY MATTER IF IT WAS
FACTUAL AND, YOU KNOW, IT WASN'T
NECESSARILY SCORED ABOUT AN
EXCELLENT PIECE OF WRITING.
IT WAS DID YOU USE SOME BIG
WORDS AND THINGS LIKE THAT.
>> Stewart: SO FOLKS ON THE
COLLEGE BOARD AND SAT, WHAT DO
THEY THINK ABOUT THESE SCORES?
HOW ARE THEY DECIDING TO ADDRESS
THIS ISSUE?
>> WELL, THEY SAY, YOU KNOW, OF
COURSE IT IS NOT GOOD, THAT THE
SCORES ARE DOWN BUT PERHAPS
THERE IS A REASON WHY THEY ARE
CHANGING THE TEST TO MEASURE,
YOU KNOW, LEARNING IN A BETTER
WAY.
>> Stewart: JANET LORIN FROM
BLOOMBERG, THANKS FOR SHARING
YOUR REPORTING.
>> THANKS FOR HAVING ME.
>>
>>THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND,
SUNDAY.
>> Stewart: THE INTERNATIONAL
AGREEMENT THAT AIMS TO LIMIT
IRAN'S NUCLEAR WEAPONS PROGRAM
HAS GAINED ONE MORE PROMINENT
SUPPORTER.
FORMER SECRETARY OF STATE COLIN
POWELL TOLD NBC'S "MEET THE
PRESS" TODAY IT'S A "GOOD DEAL"
THAT WILL REDUCE IRAN'S
STOCKPILE OF ENRICHED URANIUM
AND SHUT DOWN ITS PLUTONIUM
REACTOR.
>> THE REAL ISSUE, I THINK, THAT
CAME DOWN TO THE OPPOSITION IS
"HOW DO YOU VERIFY IT?"
AND I'M REMINDED OF WHAT MY
FORMER BOSS, RONALD REAGAN, USED
TO SAY WHEN HE TALKED TO THE
SOVIETS, "TRUST BUT VERIFY."
WITH RESPECT TO THE IRANIANS
IT'S DON'T TRUST, NEVER TRUST,
AND ALWAYS VERIFY.
AND I THINK A VIGOROUS
VERIFICATION REGIME HAS BEEN PUT
IN PLACE WITH THE I.A.E.A. AND
OTHER INTERNATIONAL
ORGANIZATIONS.
>> Stewart: PRESIDENT OBAMA HAS
ALREADY SECURED ENOUGH SENATE
VOTES TO SUSTAIN A PROMISED VETO
OF ANY LEGISLATION THAT WOULD
BLOCK THE DEAL.
REUTERS REPORTS, LAWYERS FOR THE
KENTUCKY CLERK JAILED FOR
REFUSING TO ISSUE MARRIAGE
LICENSES TO SAME-SEX COUPLES
FILED COURT PAPERS TODAY SEEKING
HER RELEASE.
KIM DAVIS IS SPENDING HER FOURTH
DAY BEHIND BARS FOR CONTEMPT,
AFTER IGNORING A FEDERAL JUDGE'S
ORDER.
DAVIS HAS CITED HER CHRISTIAN
BELIEFS AS THE REASON SHE
OPPOSES GAY MARRIAGE.
IN HIS NOTICE OF APPEAL, DAVIS'
ATTORNEY CALLS THE CONTEMPT
CHARGE "UNLAWFUL."
BEN KUROKI, WHO OVERCAME
DISCRIMINATION TO BECOME THE
ONLY JAPANESE-AMERICAN TO FLY
MISSIONS OVER JAPAN DURING WORLD
WAR TWO, HAS DIED.
BORN IN NEBRASKA TO JAPANESE
IMMIGRANTS, KUROKI ENLISTED IN
THE U.S. ARMY AFTER PEARL
HARBOR, AND PRESSED COMMANDERS
TO TRAIN AS AN AIR GUNNER.
KUROKI FLEW 30 BOMBING MISSIONS
OVER EUROPE AND NORTH AFRICA AND
THEN RECEIVED SPECIAL PERMISSION
FROM THE SECRETARY OF WAR TO
PARTICIPATE IN 28 RAIDS OVER THE
PACIFIC.
IN 2005 THE ARMY AWARDED HIM
ONE OF ITS HIGHEST HONORS, THE
DISTINGUISHED SERVICE MEDAL.
KUROKI DIED TUESDAY AT HIS HOME
IN CALIFORNIA.
HE WAS 98.
>> Stewart: AND FINALLY, IF
YOU ONE OF THE 30 MILLION
AMERICANS DRIVING 50 MILES OR
MORE THIS HOLIDAY WEEKEND, YOU
WILL BE PLEASED TO KNOW GAS
PRICES ARE AT THEIR LOWEST LEVEL
IN 11 YEARS.
THE NATIONAL AVERAGE FOR A
GALLON OF REGULAR UNLEADED IS
$2.40, WHICH IS A DOLLARS LESS
THAN A YEAR AGO.
SOUTH CAROLINA HAS THE BEST DEAL
AT $1.98 A GALLON BUT IF YOU
LIVE IN CALIFORNIA, NEVADA,
HAWAII OR ALASKA, YOU WILL PAY
MORE THAN $3 A GALLON.
THAT'S ALL FOR THIS EDITION OF
PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND, I AM
ALISON STEWART, HARI SREENIVASAN
WILL BE BACK NEXT WEEK.
THANKS FOR WATCHING.